README.md, before:

# University Researcher Data Integration System

<p align="center">
  <img width="800" alt="Project Main Screenshot" src="https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/daa770de-d56e-4679-a201-ce6c84ddb49c">
</p>

## 📋 Project Overview

This repository contains the source code and documentation for a project to automate the integration of researcher data from Google Scholar.

### 🎯 Project Purpose
The main goal of this project is to automate the process of retrieving and integrating publication data for the university's top researchers from Google Scholar into a local database. This system will serve as the primary source for generating accurate reports on scientific production.

### ✨ Key Functionalities
* Connects to the Google Scholar API via SerpApi to retrieve public data.
* Fetches researcher profiles based on their unique author IDs using the MVC (Model-View-Controller) pattern.
* Retrieves a complete list of all publications for a given researcher.
* Handles API keys and secrets securely using `.env` files.
* (Sprint 3) Stores this information in a structured MySQL database for analysis and reporting.

### 📈 Project Relevance
This project solves the problem of manual, time-consuming, and error-prone data collection. It provides the university with an efficient, reliable, and up-to-date system for generating scientific production reports and analyzing research impact. By automating this workflow, staff can focus on analysis rather than data entry.

---
<details>
<summary>💡 <strong>Click to expand Commercial Viability & Business Model</strong></summary>

### 🎯 Target Audience
This service is designed for institutions that need to track and analyze their research output, such as:
* **Universities & Academic Institutions:** For accreditation, global rankings, and faculty performance reviews.
* **Research Centers & Labs:** To justify funding and generate progress reports.
* **Corporate R&D Departments:** To monitor internal innovation and competitor activity.

### 💰 Value Proposition
The core value of this service lies in transforming a manual, error-prone process into an efficient, automated system that delivers:
* **Cost Savings:** Drastically reduces the hours spent on manual data collection.
* **Data Accuracy:** Provides reliable, up-to-date information for credible reporting.
* **Strategic Insights:** Enables data-driven decisions on performance, funding, and hiring.

### 🚀 Monetization Model: Software as a Service (SaaS)
The proposed business model is a tiered subscription service, offering different levels of functionality to meet diverse needs.

* **Starter Tier:** Aimed at small teams or individual labs, tracking a limited number of researchers with monthly data updates.
* **Professional Tier:** Designed for entire departments or medium-sized institutions, offering a higher researcher limit, weekly updates, and data export features (CSV, PDF).
* **Enterprise Tier:** A full solution for large universities, providing unlimited researchers, daily updates, advanced analytics dashboards, and API access for integration with their internal systems.

### 🌐 Future Growth
Future expansion opportunities include:
* Integrating other data sources like Scopus, Web of Science, and PubMed.
* Developing advanced citation and collaboration network analysis.
* Offering cross-institutional benchmarking services.

</details>

<details>
<summary>🐛 <strong>Click to expand the detailed Debugging Log for Sprint 2</strong></summary>

### Error 1: `ClassNotFoundException`
* **Situation:** I had just created the Model classes (`Author.java`, `Article.java`) and when trying to run the project for the first time, the program wouldn't start.
* **Error:**
    ```text
    Error: Could not find or load main class com.university.Main
    Caused by: java.lang.ClassNotFoundException: com.university.Main
    ```
* **Diagnosis:** The error meant that Java couldn't find the program's "entry point." This was because the project structure was still incomplete (missing the `Main.java` class, View, and Controller).
* **Solution:** I understood that I couldn't run an incomplete program. The solution was to follow the development plan and build the remaining components (`View` and `Controller`) before attempting another execution.

### Error 2: API Key Not Found (Environment Variable)
* **Situation:** With all the MVC code written, the program would run but stop immediately. I was using `System.getenv()` to read the API Key.
* **Error:**
    ```text
    Error: No se encontró la variable de entorno 'SERPAPI_KEY'.
    Por favor, configúrala antes de ejecutar el programa.
    ```
* **Diagnosis:** The `export SERPAPI_KEY="..."` command in the terminal is temporary and only works for that specific session. When running the program from an IDE or a new terminal, that variable is "forgotten".
* **Solution:** I adopted a more robust and professional solution:
    1.  Added the `dotenv-java` dependency to `pom.xml`.
    2.  Created a `.env` file to securely store the API Key.
    3.  Added the `.env` file to `.gitignore` to keep the secret key out of the repository.
    4.  Modified `Main.java` to use the new library and read the key from the `.env` file.

### Error 3: `.env` File Not Found (`DotenvException`)
* **Situation:** After configuring the `dotenv-java` library, the program still couldn't find the key.
* **Error:**
    ```text
    io.github.cdimascio.dotenv.DotenvException: Could not find ./.env on the file system
    ```
* **Diagnosis:** The "working directory" changed depending on how the program was executed (IDE vs. Maven command line), creating confusion about where the `.env` file should be.
* **Solution:** I implemented a "foolproof" solution: placed a copy of the `.env` file in **two locations**: one in the project root (`UniversityResearcherIntegration/`) and another inside the module folder (`app/`). This way, the program would always find it.

### Error 4: Maven Failure (`No POM in this directory`)
* **Situation:** This error appeared several times when trying to run the program from the terminal.
* **Error:**
    ```text
    [ERROR] Failed to execute goal ... there is no POM in this directory
    ```
* **Diagnosis:** The `mvn` command was being executed in the wrong folder. Maven needs to be in the same folder as the `pom.xml` file to work, which in my case was the `app/` folder.
* **Solution:** I established the "Golden Rule": Always navigate into the correct folder with `cd app` **before** executing any `mvn` command.

### Error 5: API Returning Partial Data
* **Situation:** The program finally ran without configuration errors but the result was `No se pudo obtener la información del autor`.
* **Logical Error:** The JSON response only contained metadata, not the actual author data.
* **Diagnosis:** The `author_id` of the first researcher I tested was returning an incomplete JSON payload for an unknown reason.
* **Solution:** As a diagnostic step, I changed the `author_id` in `Main.java` to that of another researcher (Yoshua Bengio), which allowed me to receive a complete JSON response.

### Error 6: JSON Parsing Error (`JsonSyntaxException` in `interests`)
* **Situation:** Using the new `author_id`, the program received data but crashed when trying to read it.
* **Error:**
    ```text
    JsonSyntaxException: ... Expected a STRING but was BEGIN_OBJECT at path $.author.interests[0]
    ```
* **Diagnosis:** My `Author.java` class expected a list of simple strings (`List<String>`) for the `interests` field, but the API sent me a list of more complex objects.
* **Solution:**
    1.  Created a new `Interest.java` class to match the object structure.
    2.  Modified `Author.java` to use `List<Interest>`.
    3.  Adjusted `AuthorView.java` to correctly read and display the titles from this new list of objects.

### Error 7: Publication List Not Appearing
* **Situation:** After fixing the `interests` issue, the program showed author data but still no publications.
* **Logical Error:** The article list wasn't being parsed from the JSON.
* **Diagnosis:** After analyzing the full JSON, I discovered two things:
    1.  The `articles` list was a "sibling" to the `author` object, not nested inside it.
    2.  The publication field was named `publication`, not `publication_info`.
* **Solution:**
    1.  Moved the `List<Article> articles` field from the `Author.java` class to the `ApiResponse.java` class.
    2.  Renamed the field in `Article.java` from `publication_info` to `publication`.
    3.  Adjusted `AuthorView.java` and `AuthorController.java` to handle this correct structure.

### Error 8: "Ghost" Compilation Error (`Unresolved compilation problem`)
* **Situation:** After restructuring the Model classes, the program refused to compile despite the code being syntactically correct.
* **Error:**
    ```text
    java.lang.Error: Unresolved compilation problem: ... missing type Article
    ```
* **Diagnosis:** Maven or the IDE were using "stale" or corrupted versions of the previously compiled files (`.class`), causing type confusion.
* **Solution:** I forced a complete and clean rebuild of the project using the command `mvn clean install`. This deleted all old compiled files and rebuilt the project from scratch, resolving the "ghost" error.

</details>

<details>
<summary>🚀 <strong>Click to expand How to Execute</strong></summary>

### Prerequisites
* Java JDK 17 or higher
* Maven 3.6 or higher
* A SerpApi account and your private API key

### Installation and Execution
1.  **Clone the repository:**
    ```bash
    git clone [https://github.com/LuisDavid0912/UniversityResearcherIntegration.git](https://github.com/LuisDavid0912/UniversityResearcherIntegration.git)
    cd UniversityResearcherIntegration
    ```
2.  **Set up the MySQL Database:**
    Open MySQL Workbench, connect to your local server, and run the following SQL commands to create the database and the table:
    ```sql
    CREATE DATABASE university_research;
    
    USE university_research;
    
    CREATE TABLE articles (
        id INT AUTO_INCREMENT PRIMARY KEY,
        title VARCHAR(255) NOT NULL,
        authors TEXT,
        publication_info VARCHAR(255),
        article_link TEXT,
        researcher_name VARCHAR(255) NOT NULL,
        retrieved_at TIMESTAMP DEFAULT CURRENT_TIMESTAMP
    );
    ```
3.  **Create the `.env` file:**
    Create a file named `.env` in the root of the `UniversityResearcherIntegration/` directory (and a copy inside `app/`). Add your API key and database credentials:
    ```bash
    SERPAPI_KEY="your_private_api_key_here"
    DB_URL="jdbc:mysql://localhost:3306/university_research"
    DB_USER="your_db_username"
    DB_PASSWORD="your_db_password"
    ```
4.  **Navigate to the app directory:**
    ```bash
    cd app
    ```
5.  **Build the project:**
    This command cleans previous builds and compiles the entire project.
    ```bash
    mvn clean install
    ```
6.  **Run the application:**
    This command executes the main class, which will fetch data from the API and save it to your database.
    ```bash
    mvn exec:java -Dexec.mainClass="com.university.project.Main"
    ```
7.  **Verify the results in the database:**
    Go back to MySQL Workbench and run a query to see the stored data:
    ```sql
    SELECT * FROM articles;
    ```
    You should see 6 rows of data in the results grid.xec:java -Dexec.mainClass="com.university.project.Main"
    ```
</details>

---

<p align="center"><i>This project is being developed as part of the Digital NAO "Server and Database Commands" challenge.</i></p>

Commit message:

Update Project Purpose on README.md

README.md, after:

# University Researcher Data Integration System

<p align="center">
  <img width="800" alt="Project Main Screenshot" src="https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/daa770de-d56e-4679-a201-ce6c84ddb49c">
</p>

## 📋 Project Overview

This repository contains the source code and documentation for a project to automate the integration of researcher data from Google Scholar.

### 🎯 Project Purpose
The main goal of this project is to automate the process of retrieving and integrating publication data for the university's top researchers from Google Scholar into a local database. This system will serve as the primary source for generating accurate reports on scientific production.

The purpose of an application like this is to create value from information.

Transform chaos into order: It takes public, scattered, and unstructured data from the internet and converts it into a private, centralized, and structured information asset for an institution.

It saves resources: Its purpose is to save hundreds of hours of manual labor, which directly translates into savings and allows people to focus on more important tasks such as analysis, rather than data collection.

Enables business intelligence: With all the data in one place, a university can answer strategic questions: Who are our most productive researchers? In which areas are we publishing the most? Are we growing in impact year after year?

### ✨ Key Functionalities
* Connects to the Google Scholar API via SerpApi to retrieve public data.
* Fetches researcher profiles based on their unique author IDs using the MVC (Model-View-Controller) pattern.
* Retrieves a complete list of all publications for a given researcher.
* Handles API keys and secrets securely using `.env` files.
* (Sprint 3) Stores this information in a structured MySQL database for analysis and reporting.

### 📈 Project Relevance
This project solves the problem of manual, time-consuming, and error-prone data collection. It provides the university with an efficient, reliable, and up-to-date system for generating scientific production reports and analyzing research impact. By automating this workflow, staff can focus on analysis rather than data entry.

---
<details>
<summary>💡 <strong>Click to expand Commercial Viability & Business Model</strong></summary>

### 🎯 Target Audience
This service is designed for institutions that need to track and analyze their research output, such as:
* **Universities & Academic Institutions:** For accreditation, global rankings, and faculty performance reviews.
* **Research Centers & Labs:** To justify funding and generate progress reports.
* **Corporate R&D Departments:** To monitor internal innovation and competitor activity.

### 💰 Value Proposition
The core value of this service lies in transforming a manual, error-prone process into an efficient, automated system that delivers:
* **Cost Savings:** Drastically reduces the hours spent on manual data collection.
* **Data Accuracy:** Provides reliable, up-to-date information for credible reporting.
* **Strategic Insights:** Enables data-driven decisions on performance, funding, and hiring.

### 🚀 Monetization Model: Software as a Service (SaaS)
The proposed business model is a tiered subscription service, offering different levels of functionality to meet diverse needs.

* **Starter Tier:** Aimed at small teams or individual labs, tracking a limited number of researchers with monthly data updates.
* **Professional Tier:** Designed for entire departments or medium-sized institutions, offering a higher researcher limit, weekly updates, and data export features (CSV, PDF).
* **Enterprise Tier:** A full solution for large universities, providing unlimited researchers, daily updates, advanced analytics dashboards, and API access for integration with their internal systems.

### 🌐 Future Growth
Future expansion opportunities include:
* Integrating other data sources like Scopus, Web of Science, and PubMed.
* Developing advanced citation and collaboration network analysis.
* Offering cross-institutional benchmarking services.

</details>

<details>
<summary>🐛 <strong>Click to expand the detailed Debugging Log for Sprint 2</strong></summary>

### Error 1: `ClassNotFoundException`
* **Situation:** I had just created the Model classes (`Author.java`, `Article.java`) and when trying to run the project for the first time, the program wouldn't start.
* **Error:**
    ```text
    Error: Could not find or load main class com.university.Main
    Caused by: java.lang.ClassNotFoundException: com.university.Main
    ```
* **Diagnosis:** The error meant that Java couldn't find the program's "entry point." This was because the project structure was still incomplete (missing the `Main.java` class, View, and Controller).
* **Solution:** I understood that I couldn't run an incomplete program. The solution was to follow the development plan and build the remaining components (`View` and `Controller`) before attempting another execution.

### Error 2: API Key Not Found (Environment Variable)
* **Situation:** With all the MVC code written, the program would run but stop immediately. I was using `System.getenv()` to read the API Key.
* **Error:**
    ```text
    Error: No se encontró la variable de entorno 'SERPAPI_KEY'.
    Por favor, configúrala antes de ejecutar el programa.
    ```
* **Diagnosis:** The `export SERPAPI_KEY="..."` command in the terminal is temporary and only works for that specific session. When running the program from an IDE or a new terminal, that variable is "forgotten".
* **Solution:** I adopted a more robust and professional solution:
    1.  Added the `dotenv-java` dependency to `pom.xml`.
    2.  Created a `.env` file to securely store the API Key.
    3.  Added the `.env` file to `.gitignore` to keep the secret key out of the repository.
    4.  Modified `Main.java` to use the new library and read the key from the `.env` file.

### Error 3: `.env` File Not Found (`DotenvException`)
* **Situation:** After configuring the `dotenv-java` library, the program still couldn't find the key.
* **Error:**
    ```text
    io.github.cdimascio.dotenv.DotenvException: Could not find ./.env on the file system
    ```
* **Diagnosis:** The "working directory" changed depending on how the program was executed (IDE vs. Maven command line), creating confusion about where the `.env` file should be.
* **Solution:** I implemented a "foolproof" solution: placed a copy of the `.env` file in **two locations**: one in the project root (`UniversityResearcherIntegration/`) and another inside the module folder (`app/`). This way, the program would always find it.

### Error 4: Maven Failure (`No POM in this directory`)
* **Situation:** This error appeared several times when trying to run the program from the terminal.
* **Error:**
    ```text
    [ERROR] Failed to execute goal ... there is no POM in this directory
    ```
* **Diagnosis:** The `mvn` command was being executed in the wrong folder. Maven needs to be in the same folder as the `pom.xml` file to work, which in my case was the `app/` folder.
* **Solution:** I established the "Golden Rule": Always navigate into the correct folder with `cd app` **before** executing any `mvn` command.

### Error 5: API Returning Partial Data
* **Situation:** The program finally ran without configuration errors but the result was `No se pudo obtener la información del autor`.
* **Logical Error:** The JSON response only contained metadata, not the actual author data.
* **Diagnosis:** The `author_id` of the first researcher I tested was returning an incomplete JSON payload for an unknown reason.
* **Solution:** As a diagnostic step, I changed the `author_id` in `Main.java` to that of another researcher (Yoshua Bengio), which allowed me to receive a complete JSON response.

### Error 6: JSON Parsing Error (`JsonSyntaxException` in `interests`)
* **Situation:** Using the new `author_id`, the program received data but crashed when trying to read it.
* **Error:**
    ```text
    JsonSyntaxException: ... Expected a STRING but was BEGIN_OBJECT at path $.author.interests[0]
    ```
* **Diagnosis:** My `Author.java` class expected a list of simple strings (`List<String>`) for the `interests` field, but the API sent me a list of more complex objects.
* **Solution:**
    1.  Created a new `Interest.java` class to match the object structure.
    2.  Modified `Author.java` to use `List<Interest>`.
    3.  Adjusted `AuthorView.java` to correctly read and display the titles from this new list of objects.

### Error 7: Publication List Not Appearing
* **Situation:** After fixing the `interests` issue, the program showed author data but still no publications.
* **Logical Error:** The article list wasn't being parsed from the JSON.
* **Diagnosis:** After analyzing the full JSON, I discovered two things:
    1.  The `articles` list was a "sibling" to the `author` object, not nested inside it.
    2.  The publication field was named `publication`, not `publication_info`.
* **Solution:**
    1.  Moved the `List<Article> articles` field from the `Author.java` class to the `ApiResponse.java` class.
    2.  Renamed the field in `Article.java` from `publication_info` to `publication`.
    3.  Adjusted `AuthorView.java` and `AuthorController.java` to handle this correct structure.

### Error 8: "Ghost" Compilation Error (`Unresolved compilation problem`)
* **Situation:** After restructuring the Model classes, the program refused to compile despite the code being syntactically correct.
* **Error:**
    ```text
    java.lang.Error: Unresolved compilation problem: ... missing type Article
    ```
* **Diagnosis:** Maven or the IDE were using "stale" or corrupted versions of the previously compiled files (`.class`), causing type confusion.
* **Solution:** I forced a complete and clean rebuild of the project using the command `mvn clean install`. This deleted all old compiled files and rebuilt the project from scratch, resolving the "ghost" error.

</details>

<details>
<summary>🚀 <strong>Click to expand How to Execute</strong></summary>

### Prerequisites
* Java JDK 17 or higher
* Maven 3.6 or higher
* A SerpApi account and your private API key

### Installation and Execution
1.  **Clone the repository:**
    ```bash
    git clone [https://github.com/LuisDavid0912/UniversityResearcherIntegration.git](https://github.com/LuisDavid0912/UniversityResearcherIntegration.git)
    cd UniversityResearcherIntegration
    ```
2.  **Set up the MySQL Database:**
    Open MySQL Workbench, connect to your local server, and run the following SQL commands to create the database and the table:
    ```sql
    CREATE DATABASE university_research;
    
    USE university_research;
    
    CREATE TABLE articles (
        id INT AUTO_INCREMENT PRIMARY KEY,
        title VARCHAR(255) NOT NULL,
        authors TEXT,
        publication_info VARCHAR(255),
        article_link TEXT,
        researcher_name VARCHAR(255) NOT NULL,
        retrieved_at TIMESTAMP DEFAULT CURRENT_TIMESTAMP
    );
    ```
3.  **Create the `.env` file:**
    Create a file named `.env` in the root of the `UniversityResearcherIntegration/` directory (and a copy inside `app/`). Add your API key and database credentials:
    ```bash
    SERPAPI_KEY="your_private_api_key_here"
    DB_URL="jdbc:mysql://localhost:3306/university_research"
    DB_USER="your_db_username"
    DB_PASSWORD="your_db_password"
    ```
4.  **Navigate to the app directory:**
    ```bash
    cd app
    ```
5.  **Build the project:**
    This command cleans previous builds and compiles the entire project.
    ```bash
    mvn clean install
    ```
6.  **Run the application:**
    This command executes the main class, which will fetch data from the API and save it to your database.
    ```bash
    mvn exec:java -Dexec.mainClass="com.university.project.Main"
    ```
7.  **Verify the results in the database:**
    Go back to MySQL Workbench and run a query to see the stored data:
    ```sql
    SELECT * FROM articles;
    ```
    You should see 6 rows of data in the results grid.xec:java -Dexec.mainClass="com.university.project.Main"
    ```
</details>

---

<p align="center"><i>This project is being developed as part of the Digital NAO "Server and Database Commands" challenge.</i></p>
